README.md, before:

# Container Census
### Discover. Visualize. Track. Compare.

**Container Census** is a lightweight, Go-powered tool that automatically scans your Docker environment across one or many hosts and gives you a clear, historical view of everything running in your stack.

Community stats on container usage can be found here: [Selfhosters Stats](https://selfhosters.cc/stats)

##### View / Manage Containers
![Main server page](screenshots/server-01.png)

##### Visualize relationships / networks / links / dependencies
![Graph view](screenshots/server-02.png)

##### Manage / Prune Images
![Image view](screenshots/server-04.png)

##### Manage Multipe Hosts with Agents
![Hosts view](screenshots/server-05.png)

##### Manage Telemetry Collection
Can enable public collection ([Selfhosters Stats](https://selfhosters.cc/stats)) or send telemetry information to your own private collector.

![Telemetry settings view](screenshots/server-07.png)



#### Want deeper insights?
##### Graph view
See how your containers are connected to each other via networks, dependencies, and links.

##### Multiple Hosts? No problem!
Run lightweight agents on remote hosts to feed data back to your private Telemetry Collector, or choose to anonymously share usage stats with the Selfhosters community to see what’s trending across thousands of self-hosted environments worldwide.

##### Privacy First
Anonymous telemetry is opt-in only and can be enabled anytime from the Settings page.

### Key Features

1. **Multi-Host Scanning** – Monitor every Docker host from one unified dashboard
1. **Lightweight Remote Agents** – Secure, zero-config connectivity between hosts
1. **Simple Web Setup** – Add new hosts with just an IP and token
1. **Automatic Discovery** – Background scans every few minutes (efault: 5)
1. **Historical Insights** – Track what’s running, when, and where
1. **Modern Web UI** – Responsive interface with live updates
1. **Full REST API** – Query all container and host data programmatically
1. **Container Control** – Start, stop, restart, remove containers, and view logs
1. **Image Management** – List, remove, or prune images across hosts
1. **Single-Container Deployment** – Everything you need in one small footprint (agents and aggregated stats available in separate containers)
1. **Flexible Connectivity** – Agent (recommended), Unix socket, TCP, or SSH
1. **Community / Private Telemetry (Optional)** – Discover popular and trending images worldwide

# Quick Start With Docker Compose

### Server (required)
```
  census-server:
    image: ghcr.io/selfhosters-cc/container-census:latest
    container_name: census-server
    restart: unless-stopped
    group_add:
      - "${DOCKER_GID:-999}"

    ports:
      - "8080:8080"

    volumes:
      # Docker socket for scanning local containers
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock

      # Persistent data directory
      - ./census/server:/app/data

      # Optional: Mount custom config file
      # Uncomment to use a custom configuration
      - ./census/config:/app/config

    environment:
      # Optional: Override config path
      # CONFIG_PATH: /app/config/config.yaml
      AUTH_ENABLED: false
      AUTH_USERNAME: your_username
      AUTH_PASSWORD: your_secure_password
      # Timezone
      TZ: ${TZ:-UTC}

    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "wget", "--no-verbose", "--tries=1", "--spider", "http://localhost:8080/api/health"]
      interval: 30s
      timeout: 3s
      retries: 3
      start_period: 10s
```

### Agent to collect data from other hosts
```
  census-agent:
    image: ghcr.io/selfhosters-cc/census-agent:latest
    container_name: census-agent
    restart: unless-stopped

    # Runtime Docker socket GID configuration
    group_add:
      - "${DOCKER_GID:-999}"

    ports:
      - "9876:9876"

    volumes:
      # Docker socket for local container management
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock

    environment:
      API_TOKEN: ${AGENT_API_TOKEN:-}
      PORT: 9876
      TZ: ${TZ:-UTC}

    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "wget", "--no-verbose", "--tries=1", "--spider", "http://localhost:9876/health"]
      interval: 30s
      timeout: 3s
      retries: 3
      start_period: 5s

```

#### Agent Configuration

**Get the API token from logs:**

   ```bash
   docker logs census-agent | grep "API Token"
   ```

**Add in the UI of the server:**
   - Click **"+ Add Agent Host"** button
   - Enter host name, agent URL (`http://host-ip:9876`), and token
   - Click **"Test Connection"** then **"Add Agent"**

---
### Telemetry & Analytics
Container Census includes an optional telemetry system to track anonymous container usage statistics. This helps understand trends and allows you to monitor your own infrastructure.
![alt text](screenshots/telemetry-5.png)
![alt text](screenshots/telemetry-1.png)
![alt text](screenshots/telemetry-2.png)
![alt text](screenshots/telemetry-3.png)

#### Key Features

1. **Anonymous data collection** - No personal information collected
1. **Multi-endpoint support** - Send to public and/or private analytics servers
1. **Self-hosted analytics** - Run your own telemetry collector
1. **Visual dashboards** - Charts showing popular images, growth trends
1. **Opt-in by default** - Disabled unless explicitly enabled
1. **Server aggregation** - Server collects stats from all agents before submission

#### Run Your Own Analytics Server
```
  telemetry-collector:
    image: ghcr.io/selfhosters-cc/telemetry-collector:latest
    container_name: telemetry-collector
    restart: unless-stopped

    ports:
      - "8081:8081"

    environment:
      DATABASE_URL: postgres://${POSTGRES_USER:-postgres}:${POSTGRES_PASSWORD:-postgres}@telemetry-postgres:5432/telemetry?sslmode=disable
      PORT: 8081
      #API_KEY: ${TELEMETRY_API_KEY:-}
      TZ: ${TZ:-UTC}
      COLLECTOR_AUTH_ENABLED: true
      COLLECTOR_AUTH_USERNAME: collector_user
      COLLECTOR_AUTH_PASSWORD: collector_secure_password

    depends_on:
      telemetry-postgres:
        condition: service_healthy

    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "wget", "--no-verbose", "--tries=1", "--spider", "http://localhost:8081/health"]
      interval: 30s
      timeout: 3s
      retries: 3
      start_period: 10s

  telemetry-postgres:
    image: postgres:15-alpine
    container_name: telemetry-postgres
    restart: unless-stopped

    environment:
      POSTGRES_DB: telemetry
      POSTGRES_USER: ${POSTGRES_USER:-postgres}
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: ${POSTGRES_PASSWORD:-postgres}
      PGDATA: /var/lib/postgresql/data/pgdata

    volumes:
      - ./telemetry-db:/var/lib/postgresql/data

    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD-SHELL", "pg_isready -U postgres"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

```

```bash
# Access dashboard
open http://localhost:8081
```

## API Endpoints for the Server

### Hosts

- `GET /api/hosts` - List all configured hosts
- `GET /api/hosts/{id}` - Get specific host details

### Containers

- `GET /api/containers` - Get latest containers from all hosts
- `GET /api/containers/host/{id}` - Get containers for specific host
- `GET /api/containers/history?start=TIME&end=TIME` - Get historical container data

### Scanning

- `POST /api/scan` - Trigger a manual scan
- `GET /api/scan/results?limit=N` - Get recent scan results

### Health

- `GET /api/health` - Health check endpoint

## Development

### Building Images

Use the interactive `build-all-images.sh` script in the scripts folder.

### Project Structure

- `cmd/server/main.go` - Server application entry point
- `cmd/agent/main.go` - Agent application entry point
- `internal/scanner/` - Docker host connection and container discovery
- `internal/agent/` - Agent server implementation
- `internal/storage/` - SQLite database operations with full CRUD
- `internal/api/` - HTTP handlers and routing
- `internal/models/` - Data structures shared across packages
- `web/` - Static frontend files served by the Go application
- `scripts/` - Utility scripts for building and deployment

### Adding New Features

1. Update models in `internal/models/models.go`
2. Add database operations in `internal/storage/db.go`
3. Implement API handlers in `internal/api/handlers.go`
4. Update frontend in `web/` directory



## Troubleshooting

### Cannot connect to Docker daemon

- Ensure Docker socket is mounted: `-v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock`
- Check socket permissions
- Verify Docker is running on the host

### Permission denied

- The container runs as non-root user (UID 1000)
- Ensure mounted volumes have correct permissions
- For Docker socket, user needs to be in `docker` group on host

### Remote host connection fails

- Verify network connectivity
- Check firewall rules
- For TCP: Ensure Docker API is exposed on remote host

### Database errors

- Ensure data directory is writable
- Check disk space
- Verify SQLite3 is properly compiled (CGO_ENABLED=1)

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

Commit message:

Version 1.2.0
Added:
 - Server: History tab showing a timeline view of when  a container was first seen, image changes, state changes, etc
 - Server: Test connection buttons when adding new agents
 - Server: Database cleanup routine to remove scan details when it can be aggregated (no data lost for tracking trends)
 - Telemetry collector: Database view to see more granular details about submissions, making debugging easier
 - Added CHANGELOG.md

Fixed:
 - Agent: API token persistence - was generating a new token each time

README.md, after:

# Container Census
[Changelog](CHANGELOG.md)
### Discover. Visualize. Track. Compare.

**Container Census** is a lightweight, Go-powered tool that automatically scans your Docker environment across one or many hosts and gives you a clear, historical view of everything running in your stack.

Community stats on container usage can be found here: [Selfhosters Stats](https://selfhosters.cc/stats)

##### View / Manage Containers
![Main server page](screenshots/server-01.png)

##### Visualize relationships / networks / links / dependencies
![Graph view](screenshots/server-02.png)

##### View History of Container
![History view](screenshots/server-08.png)


##### Manage / Prune Images
![Image view](screenshots/server-04.png)

##### Manage Multipe Hosts with Agents
![Hosts view](screenshots/server-05.png)

##### Manage Telemetry Collection
Can enable public collection ([Selfhosters Stats](https://selfhosters.cc/stats)) or send telemetry information to your own private collector.

![Telemetry settings view](screenshots/server-07.png)



#### Want deeper insights?
##### Graph view
See how your containers are connected to each other via networks, dependencies, and links.

##### Multiple Hosts? No problem!
Run lightweight agents on remote hosts to feed data back to your private Telemetry Collector, or choose to anonymously share usage stats with the Selfhosters community to see what’s trending across thousands of self-hosted environments worldwide.

##### Privacy First
Anonymous telemetry is opt-in only and can be enabled anytime from the Settings page.

### Key Features

1. **Multi-Host Scanning** – Monitor every Docker host from one unified dashboard
1. **Lightweight Remote Agents** – Secure, zero-config connectivity between hosts
1. **Simple Web Setup** – Add new hosts with just an IP and token
1. **Automatic Discovery** – Background scans every few minutes (efault: 5)
1. **Historical Insights** – Track what’s running, when, and where
1. **Modern Web UI** – Responsive interface with live updates
1. **Full REST API** – Query all container and host data programmatically
1. **Container Control** – Start, stop, restart, remove containers, and view logs
1. **Image Management** – List, remove, or prune images across hosts
1. **Single-Container Deployment** – Everything you need in one small footprint (agents and aggregated stats available in separate containers)
1. **Flexible Connectivity** – Agent (recommended), Unix socket, TCP, or SSH
1. **Community / Private Telemetry (Optional)** – Discover popular and trending images worldwide

# Quick Start With Docker Compose

### Server (required)
```
  census-server:
    image: ghcr.io/selfhosters-cc/container-census:latest
    container_name: census-server
    restart: unless-stopped
    group_add:
      - "${DOCKER_GID:-999}"

    ports:
      - "8080:8080"

    volumes:
      # Docker socket for scanning local containers
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock

      # Persistent data directory
      - ./census/server:/app/data

      # Optional: Mount custom config file
      # Uncomment to use a custom configuration
      - ./census/config:/app/config

    environment:
      # Optional: Override config path
      # CONFIG_PATH: /app/config/config.yaml
      AUTH_ENABLED: false
      AUTH_USERNAME: your_username
      AUTH_PASSWORD: your_secure_password
      # Timezone
      TZ: ${TZ:-UTC}

    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "wget", "--no-verbose", "--tries=1", "--spider", "http://localhost:8080/api/health"]
      interval: 30s
      timeout: 3s
      retries: 3
      start_period: 10s
```

### Agent to collect data from other hosts
```
  census-agent:
    image: ghcr.io/selfhosters-cc/census-agent:latest
    container_name: census-agent
    restart: unless-stopped

    # Runtime Docker socket GID configuration
    group_add:
      - "${DOCKER_GID:-999}"

    ports:
      - "9876:9876"

    volumes:
      # Docker socket for local container management
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock

      # Persistent data directory for API token
      # IMPORTANT: Mount this volume to persist the token across container restarts
      - ./census/agent:/app/data

    environment:
      # Optional: Set a specific API token (otherwise auto-generated and persisted)
      # API_TOKEN: ${AGENT_API_TOKEN:-}
      PORT: 9876
      TZ: ${TZ:-UTC}

    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "wget", "--no-verbose", "--tries=1", "--spider", "http://localhost:9876/health"]
      interval: 30s
      timeout: 3s
      retries: 3
      start_period: 5s

```

#### Agent Configuration

**API Token Persistence:**

The agent automatically generates a secure API token on first startup and persists it to `/app/data/agent-token`. To ensure the token survives container restarts and upgrades:

1. **Mount a volume** at `/app/data` (recommended - shown in docker-compose example above)
2. **Or set API_TOKEN** environment variable explicitly

Without a mounted volume, the agent will generate a new token on each restart, requiring you to update the token in the census server UI.

**Get the API token from logs:**

   ```bash
   docker logs census-agent | grep "API Token"
   ```

**Add in the UI of the server:**
   - Click **"+ Add Agent Host"** button
   - Enter host name, agent URL (`http://host-ip:9876`), and token
   - Click **"Test Connection"** then **"Add Agent"**

---
### Telemetry & Analytics
Container Census includes an optional telemetry system to track anonymous container usage statistics. This helps understand trends and allows you to monitor your own infrastructure.
![alt text](screenshots/telemetry-5.png)
![alt text](screenshots/telemetry-1.png)
![alt text](screenshots/telemetry-2.png)
![alt text](screenshots/telemetry-3.png)

#### Key Features

1. **Anonymous data collection** - No personal information collected
1. **Multi-endpoint support** - Send to public and/or private analytics servers
1. **Self-hosted analytics** - Run your own telemetry collector
1. **Visual dashboards** - Charts showing popular images, growth trends
1. **Opt-in by default** - Disabled unless explicitly enabled
1. **Server aggregation** - Server collects stats from all agents before submission

#### Run Your Own Analytics Server
```
  telemetry-collector:
    image: ghcr.io/selfhosters-cc/telemetry-collector:latest
    container_name: telemetry-collector
    restart: unless-stopped

    ports:
      - "8081:8081"

    environment:
      DATABASE_URL: postgres://${POSTGRES_USER:-postgres}:${POSTGRES_PASSWORD:-postgres}@telemetry-postgres:5432/telemetry?sslmode=disable
      PORT: 8081
      #API_KEY: ${TELEMETRY_API_KEY:-}
      TZ: ${TZ:-UTC}
      COLLECTOR_AUTH_ENABLED: true
      COLLECTOR_AUTH_USERNAME: collector_user
      COLLECTOR_AUTH_PASSWORD: collector_secure_password

    depends_on:
      telemetry-postgres:
        condition: service_healthy

    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD", "wget", "--no-verbose", "--tries=1", "--spider", "http://localhost:8081/health"]
      interval: 30s
      timeout: 3s
      retries: 3
      start_period: 10s

  telemetry-postgres:
    image: postgres:15-alpine
    container_name: telemetry-postgres
    restart: unless-stopped

    environment:
      POSTGRES_DB: telemetry
      POSTGRES_USER: ${POSTGRES_USER:-postgres}
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: ${POSTGRES_PASSWORD:-postgres}
      PGDATA: /var/lib/postgresql/data/pgdata

    volumes:
      - ./telemetry-db:/var/lib/postgresql/data

    healthcheck:
      test: ["CMD-SHELL", "pg_isready -U postgres"]
      interval: 10s
      timeout: 5s
      retries: 5

```

```bash
# Access dashboard
open http://localhost:8081
```

## API Endpoints for the Server

### Hosts

- `GET /api/hosts` - List all configured hosts
- `GET /api/hosts/{id}` - Get specific host details

### Containers

- `GET /api/containers` - Get latest containers from all hosts
- `GET /api/containers/host/{id}` - Get containers for specific host
- `GET /api/containers/history?start=TIME&end=TIME` - Get historical container data

### Scanning

- `POST /api/scan` - Trigger a manual scan
- `GET /api/scan/results?limit=N` - Get recent scan results

### Health

- `GET /api/health` - Health check endpoint

## Development

### Building Images

Use the interactive `build-all-images.sh` script in the scripts folder.

### Project Structure

- `cmd/server/main.go` - Server application entry point
- `cmd/agent/main.go` - Agent application entry point
- `internal/scanner/` - Docker host connection and container discovery
- `internal/agent/` - Agent server implementation
- `internal/storage/` - SQLite database operations with full CRUD
- `internal/api/` - HTTP handlers and routing
- `internal/models/` - Data structures shared across packages
- `web/` - Static frontend files served by the Go application
- `scripts/` - Utility scripts for building and deployment

### Adding New Features

1. Update models in `internal/models/models.go`
2. Add database operations in `internal/storage/db.go`
3. Implement API handlers in `internal/api/handlers.go`
4. Update frontend in `web/` directory



## Troubleshooting

### Cannot connect to Docker daemon

- Ensure Docker socket is mounted: `-v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock`
- Check socket permissions
- Verify Docker is running on the host

### Permission denied

- The container runs as non-root user (UID 1000)
- Ensure mounted volumes have correct permissions
- For Docker socket, user needs to be in `docker` group on host

### Remote host connection fails

- Verify network connectivity
- Check firewall rules
- For TCP: Ensure Docker API is exposed on remote host

### Database errors

- Ensure data directory is writable
- Check disk space
- Verify SQLite3 is properly compiled (CGO_ENABLED=1)

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request
